Gateway API-based `type: tlsroute` listener (#210)
strimzi/proposals: 134-tls-route-listener.md

The created `TLSRoute` resources will look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
    strimzi.io/component-type: kafka
    strimzi.io/kind: Kafka
    strimzi.io/name: my-cluster-kafka
    strimzi.io/pool-name: aston
  name: my-cluster-aston-1000
  ownerReferences:
    - apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
      blockOwnerDeletion: true
      controller: false
      kind: KafkaNodePool
      name: aston
      uid: c111cc18-9056-4888-a426-c5c701b0ae90
spec:
  hostnames:
    - kafka-1000-broker.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
  parentRefs:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: kafka-gateway
      sectionName: kafka
  rules:
    - backendRefs:
        - name: my-cluster-aston-1000
          port: 9094
```

After creating the `TLSRoute` resources, Strimzi will wait for the `.status` section to be updated and contain at least one parent reference.
This indicates that the `TLSRoute` was accepted by the gateway.
Strimzi will not perform a detailed check of which gateway is among the parent references.

> This will help provide flexibility and simplify support for different implementations.

Author: > is the operator going to update the `Kafka` status if there is any error reported in some `TLSRoute` status? 

I do not think we should do any detailed parsing of any warnings or errors beyond checking the parent references. I think that could be unpredictable how it would work with different implementations. I added it to the proposal.

> What's going to be reported when Gateway doesn't exist?

We will timeout and report an error. I added it to the proposal.

> This will help provide flexibility and simplify support for different implementations.

Reviewer: So if I got it correctly, if the Gateway exists, the `TLSRoute` has a correct parentRef configured to point to it but for any reasons it's not working and it reports some error conditions in the status, it won't be detected by Strimzi and the user will realize only when clients are not working or looking at `TLSRoute`?

> This will help provide flexibility and simplify support for different implementations.

Author: Yes, correct. But with multiple implementations, it is hard to predict what errors could we expect and how to react to them. At the end, that was the main limitation of the `type: ingress` listener that it expected things in the `.status` that many Ingress controllers did not use.

I do not see this as a problem. At the end it is "bring your own Gateway" model. So we have only limited knowledge if the Gateway works properly, if it routes the correct addresses etc. So the possible error surface is pretty huge and this would anyway cover only small part of it even if we took the compatibility risk and decided to handle it.

> This will help provide flexibility and simplify support for different implementations.

Reviewer: Ok, let's leave as it is then but I would expected the Gateway implementation to report any warning/error into the `TLSRoute` status. As Gateway API is an ... API ... it would be great to have some sort of "standardization" about it. I can understand the Gateway implementation is different across different ... implementations but when it comes to API (which are users facing) then I would expect some standard way across different Gateways.

* The `advertisedHost`, `advertisedHostTemplate`, `advertisedPort`, and `advertisedPortTemplate` fields to control advertised addresses

The following YAML shows an example of the `type: tlsroute` listener configuration in a `Kafka` CR:
```yaml
listeners:
  - name: external
    port: 9094
    type: tlsroute
    tls: true
    authentication:
      type: tls
    configuration:
      parentRefs:
        - name: kafka-gateway
          sectionName: kafka
      bootstrap:
        host: kafka.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
      advertisedHostTemplate: kafka-{nodeId}-broker.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
      hostTemplate: kafka-{nodeId}-broker.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
```

`TLSRoute` resources support TLS passthrough and TLS termination.
While the TLS mode applies to the `TLSRoute` resources, it is configured in the [Gateway Listener TLS configuration](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/1.5/spec/#listenertlsconfig) in the `Gateway` or in `ListenerSet` resources.
TLS passthrough means that the TLS connection is forwarded to Strimzi as-is, including encryption.
In this case, the TLS connection will use the TLS certificate from the Kafka brokers and can use mTLS authentication as well.

> ![TLS Passthrough](./images/134-TLS-Passthrough.svg)

Reviewer 2: nice diagram! 👍

# Gateway API-based `type: tlsroute` listener

This proposal suggests adding a new listener type (`type: tlsroute`) based on the Gateway API and its `TLSRoute` resources.

## Current situation

Strimzi currently supports four types of external listeners:
* Load balancers (`type: loadbalancer`)
* Node ports (`type: nodeport`)
* OpenShift Routes (OpenShift only) (`type: route`)
* Ingress with TLS passthrough (based on the Ingress NGINX Controller for Kubernetes) (`type: ingress`)

The Ingress-based listener (`type: ingress`) is currently deprecated.
The main motivation for the deprecation is the [retirement](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2025/11/11/ingress-nginx-retirement/) of the [Ingress NGINX Controller for Kubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx), on which this listener type was based.

> ## Gateway API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Kubernetes Gateway API
```

> [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) is an API specification only.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) is an official Kubernetes project that defines API specifications for L4 and L7 routing.
```

Reviewer 3: I thought it would be better to get a single, clear definition introduced in this section first, rather than saying it's an API spec here and then saying it's an an official Kubernetes project in the next section

> It does not provide any implementation on its own.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It does not include an implementation.
```

It provides only the Custom Resource Definitions for the API.
The API is then supported/implemented by other projects.
A list of implementations can be found on the [Gateway API website](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations/#gateway-controller-implementation-status).

The Gateway API specification is versioned.

> Its versioning and release cycle is fully independent on the Kubernetes version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Its versioning and release cycle are fully independent of the Kubernetes version.
```

Each version has two release channels: Standard and Experimental.
The Standard channel contains stable APIs.
The Experimental channel includes everything from the Standard channel plus additional experimental changes and APIs that might still change or be removed in the future.

## Motivation

> [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) is an official Kubernetes project that focuses on L4 and L7 routing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) represents the next generation of Kubernetes Ingress.
```

> It represents the next generation of Kubernetes Ingress.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

It supports L7 routing of HTTP and gRPC traffic.
It also supports L4 routing of TCP traffic.
Gateway API aims to address both north-south traffic (to/from the Kubernetes cluster) and east-west traffic (within the Kubernetes cluster through a service mesh).
For this proposal, the focus is north-south traffic routing and providing Apache Kafka access to Kafka clients running outside of the Kubernetes cluster.

> Our users have already been able to use Gateway API with Strimzi for some time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Strimzi users have already been able to use Gateway API for some time.
```

They can, for example, use the `type: cluster-ip` listener designed for access within the Kubernetes cluster and manually manage the Gateway API resources and advertised hosts and ports.
More details can be found in the [Accessing Kafka with Gateway API](https://strimzi.io/blog/2024/08/16/accessing-kafka-with-gateway-api/) blog post on the Strimzi blog.

> But with Gateway API becoming the _next_ Kubernetes routing standard, with the growing number of compatible Gateway API implementations, and with the deprecation of `type: ingress` due to Ingress NGINX Controller retirement, it makes sense for Strimzi to add direct support for Gateway API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But with Gateway API emerging as the next Kubernetes routing standard, compatible implementations continuing to grow, and `type: ingress` being deprecated following the retirement of the Ingress NGINX Controller, it’s a natural step for Strimzi to add direct Gateway API support.
```

The APIs that are relevant to the Kafka protocol (`TLSRoute` and `TCPRoute`) are also finally maturing and moving to the Standard API channel.
Direct support will simplify the configuration of Gateway API resources, as Strimzi will manage them automatically and users will no longer need to do it manually.
It will also make it easier to combine Gateway API with other Strimzi features, such as horizontal autoscaling, which would otherwise be complicated (as users would need to create Gateway API resources when new brokers are added).

## Proposal

> Strimzi will implement support for Gateway API using its `TLSRoute` resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Strimzi will implement support for Gateway API using `TLSRoute` resources.
```

> In the Strimzi API, it will be added as `type: tlsroute`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the Strimzi API, this listener will be added as `type: tlsroute`.
```

In any case, one or more parent references have to be provided to Strimzi in order to configure the `TLSRoute` resources.
The Strimzi parent reference schema would use the same schema as in the [Gateway API specification](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/1.5/spec/#parentreference).

In addition to the list of parent references, the `tlsroute` listener will reuse fields already used by other listener types:
* The `host` and `hostTemplate` fields used to configure the hostname specified in the `TLSRoute` resources
* The `advertisedHost`, `advertisedHostTemplate`, `advertisedPort`, and `advertisedPortTemplate` fields to control advertised addresses

The following YAML shows an example of the `type: tlsroute` listener configuration in a `Kafka` CR:
```yaml
listeners:
  - name: external
    port: 9094
    type: tlsroute
    tls: true
    authentication:
      type: tls
    configuration:
      parentRefs:
        - name: kafka-gateway
          sectionName: kafka
      bootstrap:
        host: kafka.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
      advertisedHostTemplate: kafka-{nodeId}-broker.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
      hostTemplate: kafka-{nodeId}-broker.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
```

> `TLSRoute` resources support TLS passthrough as well as TLS termination mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`TLSRoute` resources support TLS passthrough and TLS termination.
```

> While the TLS mode applies to the `TLSRoute` resources, it is configured in the [Gateway Listener TLS configuration](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/1.5/spec/#listenertlsconfig) in the Gateway or in ListenerSet resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the TLS mode applies to the `TLSRoute` resources, it is configured in the [Gateway Listener TLS configuration](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/1.5/spec/#listenertlsconfig) in the `Gateway` or in `ListenerSet` resources.
```

TLS passthrough means that the TLS connection is forwarded to Strimzi as-is, including encryption.
In this case, the TLS connection will use the TLS certificate from the Kafka brokers and can use mTLS authentication as well.

![TLS Passthrough](./images/134-TLS-Passthrough.svg)

TLS termination means that the TLS connection will be terminated in the gateway.
The Kafka client will connect with encryption, but the connection will be decrypted by the Gateway.
And from the Gateway it will continue in an unencrypted work to the Apache Kafka brokers.

> In this case, the connection will use the Gateway's TLS certificate and mTLS authentication would not be available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case, the connection will use the Gateway's TLS certificate, and mTLS authentication would not be available.
```

From a Strimzi perspective, the connection will not use TLS encryption.
Support for TLS termination mode is new, and I have not found any Gateway API implementation supporting it yet.
But I expect it will eventually be supported.

![TLS Termination](./images/134-TLS-Termination.svg)

To support both modes, Strimzi will support `type: tlsroute` listeners both with and without TLS encryption enabled in the Strimzi listener.

> The TLS encryption being enabled or disabled will not have any impact on how Strimzi configures the `TLSRoute` resources, as the TLs mode is configured in the Gateway.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TLS encryption being enabled or disabled will not have any impact on how Strimzi configures the `TLSRoute` resources, as the TLs mode is configured in the Gateway.
```

> It will only impact on whether Strimzi configures the Kafka brokers for TLS encryption or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It affects only whether Strimzi configures Kafka brokers to use TLS encryption.
```

          port: 9094
```

The created per-broker `TLSRoute` resources will look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
    strimzi.io/component-type: kafka
    strimzi.io/kind: Kafka
    strimzi.io/name: my-cluster-kafka
    strimzi.io/pool-name: aston
  name: my-cluster-aston-1000
  ownerReferences:
    - apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
      blockOwnerDeletion: true
      controller: false
      kind: KafkaNodePool
      name: aston
      uid: c111cc18-9056-4888-a426-c5c701b0ae90
spec:
  hostnames:
    - kafka-1000-broker.192.168.1.221.sslip.io
  parentRefs:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: kafka-gateway
      sectionName: kafka
  rules:
    - backendRefs:
        - name: my-cluster-aston-1000
          port: 9094
```

After creating the `TLSRoute` resources, Strimzi will wait for the `.status` section to be updated and contain at least one parent reference.
This indicates that the `TLSRoute` was accepted by the gateway.
Strimzi will not perform a detailed check of which gateway is among the parent references.

> It will also not check for any other conditions and try to detect any other warnings, errors, or failures.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It will not check for other conditions or try to detect any other warnings, errors, or failures.
```

In case the `TLSRoute` does not have any parent references after the configured time limit (the Cluster Operator _reconciliation timeout_), the reconciliation will fail with a corresponding error.

> This will help provide flexibility and simplify support for different implementations, that might behave differently when it comes to exact conditions, warnings, and errors..

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This will help provide flexibility and simplify support for different implementations that handle conditions, warnings, and errors differently.
```

So for a cluster with 10 brokers, you would need 11 different IP addresses or 11 different ports.
And you would need to configure each of them on a per-broker basis.
That is why this proposal chooses TLS routes as its basis and does not provide any support for TCP routes.

Integrating Strimzi directly with TCP routes is out of scope for this proposal.
However, users with unique requirements who prefer using TCP routes can continue to use the manual configuration approach.
It is also possible that future proposals will add direct support for TCP routes as well.

### Support for east-west traffic

Any use of Gateway API for routing internal Kubernetes traffic or service mesh integration is out of scope and is not addressed by this proposal.
It might, however, be addressed in a future proposal.

### Migration from `type: ingress` listener

The exact process for migrating from the `type: ingress` listener is out of scope for this proposal as it depends on the specific Ingress and Gateway API implementation and on user's infrastructure.
Strimzi will not provide any documentation documenting such a migration.

However, users can always:

1. Add a new `type: tlsroute` listener.

> 2. Reconfigure their Kafka clients to use the the new listener.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Reconfigure Kafka clients to use the new listener.
```
